Add a guide for Custom Enchantments (#134)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/items/custom-enchantment-effects.md

---
title: Custom Enchantment Effects
description: Learn how to create your enchantment effects.
authors:
  - krizh-p
---

# Custom Enchantments {#custom-enchantments}

> Since 1.21, custom enchantments have taken a "data-driven" approach; while this makes adding simple enchantments (ie. increasing attack damage) more straightforward and easy, it also complicates creating complex enchantments. This was done by breaking down what enchantments do into _effect components_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since 1.21, custom enchantments have taken a "data-driven" approach; while this makes adding simple enchantments (like increasing attack damage) easier and more straightforward, it also complicates creating complex enchantments. This was done by breaking down what enchantments do into _effect components_.
```

An effect component contains code for what special things an enchantment should do. By default, Minecraft supports various effects such as item damage, knockback, experience, and more--however, this guide will focus on creating custom enchantment effects that are not supported by default.

> **[You are heavily suggested to first determine if the default Minecraft effects will work for your usecase before contuining](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components)**. The rest of the guide will assume you understand how "simple" data-driven enchantments are configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[You are heavily suggested to first determine if the default Minecraft effects will work for your use case before continuing](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components)**. The rest of the guide will assume you understand how "simple" data-driven enchantments are configured.
```

## Custom Enchantment Effects {#custom-enchantment-effects}

Start by creating an `enchantment` folder, and within it create a folder `effect`. Within the `effect` folder, we'll create the `LightningEnchantmentEffect` record.

> Next, we can create a constructor and override the `EnchantmentEntityEffect` interface methods. We'll also create `CODEC` variable to encode and decode our effect; for more information on Codecs, [see their respective wiki page](https://docs.fabricmc.net/develop/codecs).

Reviewer: You should use relative urls for pages in the documentation.

```suggestion
Next, we can create a constructor and override the `EnchantmentEntityEffect` interface methods. We'll also create `CODEC` variable to encode and decode our effect; you can read more about [Codecs here](../codecs).
```

Here the `amount` variable indicates a value scaled to the level of the enchantment. We can use this to modify how effective the enchantment is based on level. In the code above, we are using the level of the enchantment to determine how many lightning strikes are spawned.

## Registering the Enchantment Effect {#registering-the-enchantment-effect}

Like every other component of your mod, we'll have to add this EnchantmentEffect to Minecraft's registry. To do so, add a class `ModEnchantmentEffects` (or whatever you want to name it) and a helper method to register the enchantment. Be sure to call the `registerModEnchantmentEffects()` in your main class which contains the `onInitialize()` method.

@[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/enchantment/ModEnchantmentEffects.java)

## Creating the Enchantment {#creating-the-enchantment}

Now we have an enchantment effect! Lastly, we'll create an enchantment to apply our custom effect to. This can be done by creating a JSON file like in datapacks, however, in this guide we'll generate the JSON dynamically using Fabric's data generation tools. To start, create an `EnchantmentGenerator` class.

> Within this class, we'll first register a new enchantment, and then use the `configure()` method to create our JSON programatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within this class, we'll first register a new enchantment, and then use the `configure()` method to create our JSON programmatically.
```

> @[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@\reference\latest\src\main\java\com\example\docs\data\EnchantmentGenerator.java)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/data/EnchantmentGenerator.java)
```

Be sure to use `/` in paths, and verify whether they are correct in preview.

> Before procedding, you should ensure your project is configured for data generation; if you are unsure, [view the respective wiki page](https://fabricmc.net/wiki/tutorial:datagen_setup).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, you should ensure your project is configured for data generation; if you are unsure, [view the respective wiki page](https://fabricmc.net/wiki/tutorial:datagen_setup).
```

Lastly, we must tell our mod to add our `EnchantmentGenerator` to the list of data generation tasks. To do so, simply add the `EnchantmentGenerator` to this inside of the `onInitializeDataGenerator` class.

> @[code transcludeWith=#initdatagen](@\reference\latest\src\main\java\com\example\docs\FabricDocsReferenceDataGenerator.java)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@[code transcludeWith=#initdatagen](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/FabricDocsReferenceDataGenerator.java)
```

Be sure to use `/` in paths, and verify whether they are correct in preview.

Now, when you run your mod's data generation task, enchantment JSONs will be generated inside the `generated` folder. An example can be seen below:

> @[code](@\reference\latest\src\main\generated\data\fabric-docs-reference\enchantment\thundering.json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/fabric-docs-reference/enchantment/thundering.json)
```

Be sure to use `/` in paths, and verify whether they are correct in preview.

> You should also add translations to your `en_us.json` file to give your enchantment a readable name
> 
> ```json
>     "enchantment.FabricDocsReference.thundering": "Thundering"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should also add translations to your `en_us.json` file to give your enchantment a readable name:

```json
"enchantment.FabricDocsReference.thundering": "Thundering",
```

```

You should now be able to see our enchantment by running the Client task and opening up Minecraft.

> <VideoPlayer src="/assets/develop/enchantment-effects/thunder.webm" title="Using the Lightning Effect" />

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to clean up / rerecord the video, so that the ESC menu isn't shown for a split second.

---
title: Custom Enchantment Effects
description: Learn how to create your enchantment effects.
authors:
  - krizh-p
---

# Custom Enchantments {#custom-enchantments}

> Starting from version 1.21, custom enchantments in Minecraft use a "data-driven" approach. This makes it easier to add simple enchantments, like increasing attack damage, but more challenging to create complex ones. The process involves breaking down enchantments into _effect components_.

Reviewer: > Starting from version 1.21

Does this have to be mentioned here? The plugin already highlights it.

> in Minecraft

Again, the entire Fabric project revolves around Minecraft, no need to specify it in every page IMO.

> An effect component contains the code that defines the special effects of an enchantment. Minecraft supports various default effects, such as item damage, knockback, and experience. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An effect component contains the code that defines the special effects of an enchantment. Minecraft supports various default effects, such as item damage, knockback, and experience.
```

> However, this guide focuses on creating custom enchantment effects that aren't supported by default.
> 
> **Before continuing, please check if the default Minecraft effects can work for your needs by visiting [the Minecraft Wiki's Enchantment Effect Components page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components)**. The rest of the guide assumes you understand how to configure "simple" data-driven enchantments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: tip
Be sure to check if the default Minecraft effects satisfy your needs by visiting [the Minecraft Wiki's Enchantment Effect Components page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components). This guide assumes you understand how to configure "simple" data-driven enchantments and focuses on creating custom enchantment effects that aren't supported by default.
:::
```

Reviewer: Perhaps it works now

> An effect component contains the code that defines the special effects of an enchantment. Minecraft supports various default effects, such as item damage, knockback, and experience. 
> 
> However, this guide focuses on creating custom enchantment effects that aren't supported by default.
> 
> **Before continuing, please check if the default Minecraft effects can work for your needs by visiting [the Minecraft Wiki's Enchantment Effect Components page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components)**. The rest of the guide assumes you understand how to configure "simple" data-driven enchantments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An effect component contains the code that defines the special effects of an enchantment. Minecraft supports various default effects, such as item damage, knockback, and experience. 

::: tip
Be sure to check if the default Minecraft effects satisfy your needs by visiting [the Minecraft Wiki's Enchantment Effect Components page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components). This guide assumes you understand how to configure "simple" data-driven enchantments and focuses on creating custom enchantment effects that aren't supported by default.
:::
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure why it isn't letting me commit the suggestion. @krizh-p Would you be able to make these changes manually?

Reviewer 3: After this, LGTM

## Custom Enchantment Effects {#custom-enchantment-effects}

> Start by creating an `enchantment` folder, and within it create a folder `effect`. Within the `effect` folder, we'll create the `LightningEnchantmentEffect` record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by creating an `enchantment` folder, and within it, create an `effect` folder. Within that, we'll create the `LightningEnchantmentEffect` record.
```

> Next, we can create a constructor and override the `EnchantmentEntityEffect` interface methods. We'll also create `CODEC` variable to encode and decode our effect; you can read more about [Codecs here](../codecs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we can create a constructor and override the `EnchantmentEntityEffect` interface methods. We'll also create a `CODEC` variable to encode and decode our effect; you can read more about [Codecs here](../codecs).
```

> The bulk of our code will go into the `apply()` event, which is called when the criteria for your enchantment to work is met. We'll later configure this `Effect` to be called when an entity is hit, but for now let's write simple code to strike the target with lightning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bulk of our code will go into the `apply()` event, which is called when the criteria for your enchantment to work is met. We'll later configure this `Effect` to be called when an entity is hit, but for now, let's write simple code to strike the target with lightning.
```

@[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/enchantment/effect/LightningEnchantmentEffect.java)

> Here the `amount` variable indicates a value scaled to the level of the enchantment. We can use this to modify how effective the enchantment is based on level. In the code above, we are using the level of the enchantment to determine how many lightning strikes are spawned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the `amount` variable indicates a value scaled to the level of the enchantment. We can use this to modify how effective the enchantment is based on level. In the code above, we are using the level of the enchantment to determine how many lightning strikes are spawned.
```

## Registering the Enchantment Effect {#registering-the-enchantment-effect}

> Like every other component of your mod, we'll have to add this `EnchantmentEffect` to Minecraft's registry. To do so, add a class `ModEnchantmentEffects` (or whatever you want to name it) and a helper method to register the enchantment. Be sure to call the `registerModEnchantmentEffects()` in your main class which contains the `onInitialize()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like every other component of your mod, we'll have to add this `EnchantmentEffect` to Minecraft's registry. To do so, add a class `ModEnchantmentEffects` (or whatever you want to name it) and a helper method to register the enchantment. Be sure to call the `registerModEnchantmentEffects()` in your main class, which contains the `onInitialize()` method.
```

@[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/data/EnchantmentGenerator.java)

Before proceeding, you should ensure your project is configured for data generation; if you are unsure, [view the respective wiki page](https://fabricmc.net/wiki/tutorial:datagen_setup).

Lastly, we must tell our mod to add our `EnchantmentGenerator` to the list of data generation tasks. To do so, simply add the `EnchantmentGenerator` to this inside of the `onInitializeDataGenerator` class.

@[code transcludeWith=#initdatagen](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/FabricDocsReferenceDataGenerator.java)

Now, when you run your mod's data generation task, enchantment JSONs will be generated inside the `generated` folder. An example can be seen below:

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/fabric-docs-reference/enchantment/thundering.json)

You should also add translations to your `en_us.json` file to give your enchantment a readable name:

```json
"enchantment.FabricDocsReference.thundering": "Thundering",
```

> You should now have a working custom enchantment effect! You can test it by enchanting a weapon with the enchantment and hitting a mob, an example is given in the following video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now have a working custom enchantment effect! Test it by enchanting a weapon with the enchantment and hitting a mob. An example is given in the following video:
```

---
title: Custom Enchantment Effects
description: Learn how to create your enchantment effects.
authors:
  - krizh-p
---

# Custom Enchantments {#custom-enchantments}

> Since 1.21, custom enchantments have taken a "data-driven" approach; while this makes adding simple enchantments (ie. increasing attack damage) more straightforward and easy, it also complicates creating complex enchantments. This was done by breaking down what enchantments do into effect components. An effect component contains code for what special things an enchantment should do. By default, Minecraft supports various effects such as item damage, knockback, experience, and more--however, this guide will focus on creating custom enchantment effects that are not supported by default. **[Before contuining, it is heavily suggested you first determine if the default Minecraft effects will work for your usecase.](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Enchantment_definition#Effect_components)** The rest of the guide will assume you understand how "simple" data-driven enchantments are configured.

Reviewer 3: Please break this up into multiple lines. It's a bit difficult to read.
![image](https://github.com/FabricMC/fabric-docs/assets/93472213/5eb80f5e-b68d-4e56-bf56-749e4a786236)

# Custom Enchantment Effects {#custom-enchantment-effects}

> After you've confirmed that your enchantment will not work with the default effect components, we can start by creating an `enchantment` folder, and within it create a folder `effect`. Within the `effect` folder, we'll create the `LightningEnchantmentEffect` record.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Start by creating an `enchantment` folder, and within it create a folder `effect`. Within the `effect` folder, we'll create the `LightningEnchantmentEffect` record.
```

> Next, we can create a constructor and override the `EnchantmentEntityEffect` interface methods. We'll also create `CODEC` variable to encode and decode our effect; A `MapCodec` is a part of Minecraft's serialization system, which allows for converting data between different formats (e.g., from Java objects to JSON or binary data).   

Reviewer 3: No need for the info on MapCodec, you can just do something like "For more information on Codecs, consider having a read of the [Codecs page]\(...)

> ```java

Reviewer 3: This needs to be put into the reference mod.

public record LightningEnchantmentEffect(EnchantmentLevelBasedValue amount) implements EnchantmentEntityEffect {
    public static final MapCodec<EnchantmentEntityEffect> CODEC = RecordCodecBuilder.mapCodec(instance ->
            instance.group(
                    EnchantmentLevelBasedValue.CODEC.fieldOf("amount").forGetter(EnchantmentEntityEffect::amount)
            ).apply(instance, EnchantmentEntityEffect::new)
    );

    @Override
    public void apply(ServerWorld world, int level, EnchantmentEffectContext context, Entity target, Vec3d pos) {
        // we'll add code here...
    }

    @Override
    public MapCodec<? extends EnchantmentEntityEffect> getCodec() {
        return CODEC;
    }
}
```

> Here the `EnchantmentLevelBasedValue amount` indicates a value scaled to the level of the enchantment. We can use this to modify how effective the enchantment is based on level.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here the `amount` field within the codec indicates a value scaled to the level of the enchantment. We can use this to modify how effective the enchantment is based on level.
```

## The `apply()`  Event

The bulk of our code will go into the `apply()` event, which is called when the criteria for your enchantment to work is met. We'll later configure this Effect to be called when an entity is hit, but for now let's write simple code to strike the target with lightning.

```java
@Override

> public void apply(ServerWorld world, int level, EnchantmentEffectContext context, Entity target, Vec3d pos) {

Reviewer 3: Again, this needs to be within the reference mod.

    if (target instanceof LivingEntity victim){
        if (context.owner() != null) {
            // Spawn lightning strikes at the target based on enchantment level
            float numStrikes = this.amount.getValue(level);
            for (float i = 0; i < numStrikes; i++) {
                BlockPos position = victim.getBlockPos();
                EntityType.LIGHTNING_BOLT.spawn(world, position, SpawnReason.TRIGGERED);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## Registering the Enchantment Effect {#registering-the-enchantment-effect}

Like every other component of your mod, we'll have to add this EnchantmentEffect to Minecraft's registry. To do so, add a class `ModEnchantmentEffects` (or whatever you want to name it) and a helper method to register the enchantment. Be sure to call the `registerModEnchantmentEffects()` in your main class (FabricDocsReference.java if you are following the docs).

> @[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/enchantment/ModEnchantmentEffects.java)

Reviewer 3: This reference is invalid. Make sure the path is correct.

> Not Found: ...\reference\latest\src\main\java\com\example\docs\data\EnchantmentGenerator.java

## Creating the Enchantment {#creating-the-enchantment}

> Now we have an enchantment effect! Lastly, we'll create an enchantment to apply our custom effect to. This can be done by creating a JSON file like in datapacks, however, in this guide we'll generate the JSON dynamically using Fabric's data generation tools. To start, create a folder `data` and within it create an `EnchantmentGenerator` class; optionally you can keep this class within your `enchantment` folder.

Reviewer 3: You should link to both the data generation Fabric Wiki page here.

> Now we have an enchantment effect! Lastly, we'll create an enchantment to apply our custom effect to. This can be done by creating a JSON file like in datapacks, however, in this guide we'll generate the JSON dynamically using Fabric's data generation tools. To start, create a folder `data` and within it create an `EnchantmentGenerator` class; optionally you can keep this class within your `enchantment` folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we have an enchantment effect! Lastly, we'll create an enchantment to apply our custom effect to. This can be done by creating a JSON file like in datapacks, however, in this guide we'll generate the JSON dynamically using Fabric's data generation tools. To start, create an `EnchantmentGenerator` class.
```

Within this class, we'll first register a new enchantment, and then use the `configure()` method to create our JSON programatically.

> @[code transcludeWith=#entrypoint](@\reference\latest\src\main\java\com\example\docs\data\EnchantmentGenerator.java)

Reviewer 3: Some weird indents within this reference code block, make sure that the comments used to mark this reference in the code are at the same indentation level.

> Lastly, we must tell our mod to add our `EnchantmentGenerator` to the list of data generation tasks. To do so, ensure your project has data generation turned on/configured correctly, and look for (or create if it doesn't exit) a data generation class; this will usually be at the root of your package (same folder as your main class). Lastly, add the `EnchantmentGenerator` to this inside of the `onInitializeDataGenerator` class.

Reviewer 3: Again, link to the Fabric Wiki's datagen setup page, dont bother explaining data generation in a page about advancements, just say that they should setup datagen before continuing.

This should really be done at the top of the page, alongside the "Check if you can do this with vanilla enchantment effects before making a custom one."

```java

> public void onInitializeDataGenerator(FabricDataGenerator generator) {

Reviewer 3: This needs to be in the reference mod!

		FabricDataGenerator.Pack pack = generator.createPack();
		pack.addProvider(EnchantmentGenerator::new);
	}
```

> The code above will automatically generate the respective JSON files for your enchantment when you run the `Data Generation` task in your gradle. This task only needs to be run once when you update this file. 

Reviewer 3: Not needed, leave this to the data generation page. 

Instead maybe something like 

"Now, when you run your mod's data generation task, enchantment JSONs will be generated. An example can be seen below: ... [code reference here to JSON file generated]"

You should also add translations to your `en_us.json` file to give your enchantment a readable name

```
    "enchantment.FabricDocsReference.thundering": "Thundering"`
```

You should now be able to see our enchantment by running the Client task and opening up Minecraft.

> <VideoPlayer src="/assets/develop/enchantment-effects/thunder.mp4" title="Using the Lightning Effect" />

Reviewer 3: Nice use of the video, please convert it to webm though to save space and time on page load.
